title: "Dissonant Pleasure: Analyzing the Male Gaze in Psycho" date: 2022-12-07

The shower sequence in Psycho is Alfred Hitchcock’s and arguably cinema’s most famous scene. At first glance, Psycho’s shower sequence is an archetypal example of Laura Mulvey’s male gaze; the camera seems to objectify and sexualize Marion, portraying her as a fragmented naked body being helplessly butchered. However, upon closer reading, it becomes clear that Hitchcock’s Psycho instead hijacks the male gaze in order to force the viewer to recognize their own investments in the patriarchal unconscious.

Hitchcock brings the audience into the shower scene through the eyes of Norman Bates. From his parlor, Norman takes on a “Peeping Tom”-esque position, staring at Marion as she undresses through a hole in the wall. In Norman’s view, and thus the audience’s view, Marion covers the majority of the frame, half-naked and completely unaware of being viewed. The audience’s gaze is illicit and sexual, seeking pleasure from Marion’s body. Yet, as the viewer’s eyes scan the frame, they notice the dark fettered edge on the screen. The view of Marion is filtered through the edges of the peephole, with the edges of the wall in frame to remind the viewer that they are looking through the eyes of Norman. Hitchcock places the audience in an uncomfortable position, inviting them to invest erotic desire in the unsuspecting Marion while also showing them that they are partners-in-crime with Norman, a psychosexual predator. As Norman maintains his view, the camera shifts away from Marion to a close-up of Norman’s eye. That switch forces the audience to consider where the camera was, imploring them to look “themselves” in the eye as they witness the cause of both Norman and their own arousal and perversity. Hitchcock’s transition from the intended enjoyment of Marion operates to force the audience into a confrontation with their own investments in sexual objectification. 

Hitchcock continues to use and subvert Norman’s gaze in the shower scene proper. How Marion is shot contrasts directly with the sounds of the scene, creating a dissonant ambience. Here, even as she is being murdered, Marion is shot voyeuristically as an object of desire. Marion’s nude body parts are examined by the camera, her whole as a character reduced to close-ups of the flesh. Yet, while the viewer is scopophilically engaged, they are also filled with intense discomfort and anxiety. The environment is disorienting; Bernard Herrman’s famous score, “The Murder”, plays in the background, subjecting viewers to vicious staccatos to create an ominous atmosphere. The music progresses, leading into a series of glissandos, disorienting the audience to put them on edge. Marion’s screams cut through the music - her helpless cries and screams strike the audience’s senses erratically in comparison to the more in-meter screaming of the violin, adding to the dissonant feeling. The sounds of the scene are sharp, spiky, and erratic, contrasting with the uninjured flesh; as a result, the audience’s discomfort rises and forces them to reevaluate their relation with pleasure. The conflict between visual pleasure and discomforting environment shakes the viewer, compelling them to question why exactly they keep on watching. 

Hitchcock builds on this experience with his use of the camera. The shooting of Marion’s death is manic and volatile, constantly switching back and forth from Marion’s view of the knife, to an above shot of the stabbing, to close-ups of her from the killer’s perspective. Each shot lasts moments, keeping the viewer disoriented but still aware of what is occurring. It is difficult to follow, as scenes of pleasure are interspersed with violence, confusing but constant. Each time the knife goes down, the camera follows the killer’s arm as it moves towards the flesh where the knife is about to make contact. The viewer subconsciously expects to see the knife cut through skin. However, Hitchcock instead replaces the gorish, bloody scene with the unadulterated flesh of Marion Crane. On the subconscious level, Hitchcock compels the audience to find pleasure and enjoyment in Marion’s body, yet consciously reminds us in the interspersed cuts that our enjoyment is not only ignorant of her pain but also parasitic upon it, as the viewer is only permitted to see her flesh in response to violence. Blood and gore are constantly in the background, on the walls behind her legs but never tainting the flesh. The constant swapping between scenes of the violent knife and the erotic flesh causes the viewer to unconsciously desire Marion’s stabbing yet still be consciously repulsed by it. Hitchcock thus implicitly begs the question, “Why are you enjoying this? What is being enjoyed here?”. The patriarchal unconscious is exposed in full view, as the pseudo-rape of Marion is impossible to look away from but still sickeningly terrible, forcing the reader to recognize the perverse source of their desires. 

While the male gaze is ever present in Hitchcockian cinema, it’s usage in Psycho holds radical potential by demanding that the viewer unearth their own patriarchal investments. The striking cinematography of Hitchcock’s shower scene has secured the film’s spot in canon, opening up new avenues for the thriller genre. It’s impossible to know Hitchcock’s true personal views, but critical analyses of his work shows that his art, conscious or not, has subversive value, confronting the norms of mainstream cinema both then and now. 
