---
title: "BATMAN'S HOLLOW SIGNIFIERS"
date: 2022-10-06

  Capitalism has reached its absolute limit. In search of new surplus value, capital requires the commodification of semiotic realms, generating ideological fuel to sustain itself. In no place is this more apparent than cinema; film is dependent on creating a space through which cultural cathexes can be processed and fitted into power’s narratives. With the rise of a new American progressivism, neoliberal capitalism then demands a method to reshape these modes of resilience into ideological sustenance and taming its potential radicality.  
  
  Politics is inescapable in Batman. Whether it’s the original all-American hero of the 40s, the Bateman-like action star of the 2000s, or the populist of the 2010s – Batman reflects and sutures together the capitalistic threads of its time, forming a narrative that captures the cultural imaginary. At first glance, Matt Reeves’ The Batman (2022) appears to offer a genuine critique of power – it explores the class positions of Bruce Wayne and the various villains of Gotham, interrogating their status quo and pushing progressive ideas. However, a semiotic read of the film understands that, through the hollowing of its linguistic and visual signifiers, neoliberalism manifests The Batman as a final resort through which progressive cathexis can be dispersed and reappropriated in parallel with capital. In its text, The Batman recycles radical linguistics by paradoxically upholding their signifying potential while atomizing the forces that give them energy. Further, the film ideologizes its cinematic apparatuses, collaborating to resignify possibly radical images in an attempt to preserve sovereign individualism as a cultural response to the structure of neoliberalism.  
  
  The Batman’s language is overwhelmingly political. Throughout the movie, a litany of “woke” lines are dropped – Catwoman ridicules the elite class of “white privileged assholes,” while Gotham’s civilians regularly call out the “rich scum-suckers” and failed “safety nets” of the city. The Batman adopts the semiotics of young American progressivism, utilizing their buzzwords as a form of affective capital that signals the film’s political allegiances, bringing affective comfort to the audience such that they accept its dominant narratives. The film’s ideological control thus lives on through its commodification of semiotic spaces, with the popular linguistics of the left operating as a new form of surplus value to be absorbed. Moreover, while the film’s content is seemingly radical, these lines are dropped without representation. Catwoman’s “white privilege” line is followed by a romantic moment, while the shoutings of Gotham’s citizens are mediated by Batman using his wealth for good. These criticisms of power then fail to connect progressive signifiers to what they entail, not exposing the flaws in Gotham’s structures but only repeating the terminology of resistance. The film’s repetitive signification then disconnects radical signifiers from their intended meaning – the newly hollowed signifiers no longer contain their original contexts and complexities, reduced only to information blips and posturing. Such a strategy is also employed to problematize the linguistics of certain trends. In the film's earlier acts, The Riddler is over coded by the linguistics of the “eat the rich” crowd – whether it’s his speeches against the cities corrupt “elite” or his hunting of the “most powerful people in the city,” it becomes clear that he is seen as an antihero of the working class. The movie’s dialogue, in particular it’s display of the Riddler’s populism, works to signify the ideals of more radical progressives with his violence, thus making viewers identify with his character. This process of re-signification is continued as the Riddler’s character is demystified, with later parts of the movie showing him as a friendless twitch-streamer with “500 followers” who fanboys at the sight of Batman. Then any sort of identification that viewers have towards his linguistics, his anti-capitalist crusades, are semiotically punished by association - the re-signification of the Riddler makes the audience question whether their own modes of thought are equally pathetic.  
  
  Dialogue aside, one of the things that really made Reeve’s film stand out is its score. Gotham is always drenched in a flood of gritty, nostalgic melodies and in particular  . The piece that defines the film is Giacchino’s take on Nirvana’s “Something in the Way,” with samplings of the song appearing throughout and the full piece playing twice in the beginning and end of the film. The song itself is melancholic, its slow chord progression embedding a feeling of hopelessness in the viewer. Cobain sings about his own abjection from society, describing his class struggles and failures. He talks about living “underneath the bridge”,  his words matching the melody while talking about tarps that “sprung a leak,” his descriptions of suffering built into and juxtaposed with his beautiful melancholic art. The score engages in a sort of economy of suffering through its aestheticization of class struggle – the signifiers of class antagonism that the score engages lose their revolutionary potential, Cobain instead instructing workers to wallow in poverty’s spectacle and wait for a magical vigilante hero to fix their problems. The song and movie commodify poverty, asking listeners to consume its lyrical appeal. Batman here acts as a stand-in for Cobain - he is cutting, counter-cultural yet mainstream yet lacks any coherent response to capital’s flaws.  
  
  Beyond its linguistic signifiers, The Batman is a visual spectacle with its aesthetic choices grounded in a desire to generate new value for capital by romanticizing Gotham’s pain. Throughout the film, Gotham’s crime is never ugly. The camera frame is always dirtied up – by rain, grime or blurs – giving the city a sense of texture and depth. The constant blurring also works to obfuscate the violence and suffering of the city’s losses – the dirtied frame makes it difficult for the viewer to lose focus of what’s occurring on screen, depersonalizing the violence and replacing it with the raw visual textures of Gotham. The materiality of class struggle is lost – the dirtied frame distances the viewer from the impacts of exploitation, compelling them to move instead towards investing in the beautiful dirt and rain covering the camera lens. It’s also interesting to note the architectural choices of Gotham – despite its Americanness, Gotham is dotted with Roman arches, basilica structures and domed ceilings. Gotham’s picturesque gothic architecture resignifies its social problems by associating them with beauty, not only distracting but investing the viewer in its suffering. Abjection under capital is made into a visual commodity – suffering is disconnected from its material impacts and instead commodified into something the viewer unconsciously desires to see more of, as they remain charmed by Gotham’s streets.  
  
  An examination of the camera’s movement too reveals the film’s ideological motives. In the film’s ending, the Riddler blows up a series of river barriers, drowning Gotham in a massive flood. The camera here takes a bird’s eye view of the city – the water rushing into the city looks like an unstoppable biblical force while the viewer is placed into the eyes of a godlike figure. In the scene's end, as the progressive mayor is about to drown the camera switches to her perspective, looking up to see Batman holding his arm outstretched ready to pull her out the water. The low angle positions Batman as a savior, an authority figure that’s required to further progressivism. It’s important to note that the camera first looks down on the mayor with a moment of pity, and then moves to see Batman from the ground up, the light behind him shining like an angelic halo. In this moment, the camera instructs the viewer to see Batman as a holy, indomitable figure – that they should wait for their own vigilante messiah to solve society's flaws. Batman’s pulling her out of the water quite literally baptizes progressivism, incentivizing the viewer to identify with the purified and capitalistic progressivism that Batman offers.  
  
  In search of new value, cinema under capital desires new semiotic spaces to colonize and exploit. The Batman, as a culmination of 2022’s cultural epoch, frames itself as a more realistic take on the hero that questions the status quo yet ultimately leads the viewer into the ideological traps of neoliberal capital. The text’s unconscious desire to find symbolic surplus value causes it to commodify the progressive message it nominally follows, threading the cultural radicalism of its time into the fabric of capital.
