In 2021, the new entrance to the Houston Zoo was unveiled (“Building the Future”). In contrast to the colorful theme park-like design of the old entrance, the new one carries itself with an obnoxious self-seriousness. Serif fonts, a forest green palette, and most importantly a new motto - “See Them. Save Them.”
The motto and the redesign are part of the Zoo’s 2016 strategic plan, which aim to pivot the Zoo away from being just a recreational and educational center, towards using its displays to instill “the importance of living” in balance with wildlife and “influence people’s behaviors so they can take concrete action to save” the natural world (“The Future Houston Zoo” 2016, 4). The Zoo’s plan is thus explicitly ideological - it believes its architectural changes will “connect communities” with a faraway, non-human, nature through environmental immersion, upholding the sacredness of the natural “balance” (“The Future Houston Zoo” 2016, 5). 
  
While tempting, it’s impossible to take the Houston Zoo’s notions of “wildlife,” “human” and “natural world” neutrally. Our historical analysis established that the Zoo itself is entangled in a history of Western colonial domination – from the menageries’ desire to display savagery of faraway lands to the human zoos capture of foreign exoticized cultures. Similarly, its design choices must be tied to the broader cultural context from which it emerges. Returning to the entrance’s motto then, some natural questions emerge: how does the Zoo see its world? Who, precisely, is the “Them” it addresses? What does the Zoo want its visitors to save? In my visits to the Zoo, I focused on the construction of its flagship exhibits, hoping to answer these questions and piece together the specific ideologies it hopes to imbue. I’ve come to argue that rather than connecting people and “wildlife”, these architectural choices are instead determined by a colonial imagining of spacetime which actively distances and dominates the places it attempts to save.
COLONIAL TIME – SEEING THEM
Much of the Zoo’s essence is captured in its longtime flagship display, titled the African Forest. Even before we entered the exhibit, the Zoo began communicating its narrative with guided fencing. At a distance, the fences appear to thin branches, being shaped disorderly and colored brown, but a closer inspection reveals them to be painted metal rail.  These fences closely resemble bomas, a term brought into the English language by colonial explorer Henry Morton Stanley to describe the livestock enclosures he saw in Central Africa, and later used to denote German and British colonial administrative forts (Rushohora 2019, 285). These enclosures and the historical narratives they evoke connect the African wildlife visitors see to the Dark Continent that explorers like Stanley imagined, transporting visitors through space and time to a perceived wild Africa. The making of metal into wood also taps into a broader social imagination. If colonialism justifies itself in enlightening primitive societies towards ordered civilized future, then the shaping of geometric industrial metal into disorded organic wood is a temporal backstep, rendering Africa a place that needs to be saved and civilized. 
Adventure is the exhibit’s central theme. To enter the African Forest proper, visitors must pass through a tunnel which opens into two sets of structures. The Zoo’s website reveals that this is very intentional, as it’s description of the exhibit narrates:
“Your adventure begins as you enter the African Forest, trekking down a path that emerges into a village trading outpost. You explore the small, round huts that surround a fire pit.” (“African Forest”)
The framing of the African Forest as a place where the visitor’s primary relationship with place is to “explore” and seek “adventure” puts the entire continent in an otherizing limbo – in which it is simultaneously always unknown yet always being explored. The Zoo’s naming of the building as a “village trading outpost” characterizes it not only as a human settlement but an outpost of a broader European empire. The Africa that the Zoo wants visitors to immerse in, then, is clearly not the real East Africa that Africans live today, but the imagined wild space of the 19th-century, in which the only Western relationship to be had is one of exploration and empire. It’s worth noting that the outpost is purposefully built to look dilapidated. Parts of the wall are cut out as if they were worn to expose the underlying material, as if to communicate to us that the African Forest world we’re entering is disordered and wild, existing outside the passage of time.
In conjunction with the Western trading outpost stands a decidedly non-Western village. The juxtaposition of the two sites reinforces the previously discussed colonial temporality; looking back to the nearby outpost, visitors can buy goods and use the facilities, allowing them to not only look at but momentarily live through the eyes of the colonial explorer. In contrast, the huts are empty – if a visitor is short enough to step inside, they see only a dark and barren circle unfit for “modern” habitation, while most other visitors can’t even enter the structures and thus cannot imagine themselves in “African” life –
  
only gazing at the structures from the outside like the nearby animals’ enclosures.  The inaccessibility of the huts is in part because they function as a children’s playground, in contrast to the adult space of the trading post café. The huts as a form of human habitation invite visitors to imagine the livelihoods of African people, yet when visitors gaze upon the huts, they see Western children playing – visually infantilizing the non-Western communities it represents.  The “them” that the visitor is asked to “see” here is no longer restricted to animal life but a constructed image of a racially inferior other.
Given the vagueness of their descriptions – the only available sign says “Forest Huts” – it seems unlikely the Zoo architects designed the structures with historical or cultural accuracy in mind. That said, they vaguely resemble Congolese pygmy huts, characterized by a rounded shape with large leaf-based roofs (Mukenge 2002, 85). The choice of pygmy huts to represent all of Africa’s people must be viewed with suspicion, for a group consisting of less than 3% of the Congo’s population and far less so for the entire African Forest region they’re chosen to represent (IWGIA 2022, 9). On the one hand, to Western audiences they fit a particular colonial fantasy: their hunter-gatherer economies, perceived natural lifestyles and short statures align with racialized stereotypes, rendering them narrative “missing links” in evolutionary pseudobiology (“Bushman Share a Cage” 1906, 17). Congolese pygmy people also provide pretext for dilating the sizes of the huts, rendering them tiny in comparison to the nearby imposing trading outpost to establish a dominating visual frame. Yet maybe most importantly, the cultural choice should be tied in with the previous discussion of the human Zoo – with the display of Congolese pygmies in the Bronx Zoo being one of if not the most well-known example of these exhibitions (“Bushman Share a Cage” 1906, 17). If the purpose of the human zoo was ultimately the savagization of colonized cultures, then the Congolese pygmy huts are an effective humanless human zoo: preserving the gaze of superiority and racialized difference of the human zoo, but without a point of criticism that emerges from enslaving other people. 
TOURIST MODERNITY – SAVING THEM
In a lot of ways, one of the Zoo’s newest and most innovative areas, South America’s Pantanal, reads as a critique of the African Forest and more broadly the stylings of the 2010s Houston Zoo. Instead of attempting to presenting the animals of cultural demand and popular expectation, this post-2016 planning exhibit prioritizes capturing accurately a relatively little-known ecosystem. In choosing to represent an environmentally derived rather than human constructed space, it presents itself as a more “immersive, engaging experience” (“The Future Houston Zoo” 2016, 54). It also markets being a utopic space which exemplifies successful human-animal balance. In contrast to the African Forest, the Pantanal’s distinctly modern architecture shows off sustainable housing, wildlife conservation facilities and my favorite feature: road signs showing off the upcoming wildlife. The idealism of the Pantanal is consequently why it requires a critical interrogation. 
   
The Pantanal’s architectural choices frame the exhibit through a sustainable eco-tourist lens, which depends on a contradictory conception of the human/nature dichotomy. After passing a sequence of signs teasing its wildlife, they arrive at the formal entrance of the Pantanal: an overpass made up of colorful square eco-lodges. Within the Zoo the eco-lodge is the only frame through which visitors are allowed to view the recreated Pantanal ecosystem. This framing, the Zoo believes, can paint the Pantanal as an object of (aesthetic) desire – something to be gawked at and consumed, who’s beauty provides the affective fuel for conservation. Such a vision requires enclosing ecosystems in a “virgin and pristine” bubble, unaltered by human activity, which not only necessitates the dispossession of indigenous peoples already there (Bicalho and Hoefle 2022, 204) but also paradoxically requires distancing visitors from the land their on in a quarantined state. By defining the lodge as the only sustainable way to immerse oneself, the Zoo visitor must recognize that they are outside of the natural world, ideologically disconnecting their being from the land they inhabit. 
  
The logic of the eco-lodge structure also asks the visitor to change how they view the ecosystem – from a place to a consumable experience, something to be kept sacred and “toured” from faraway. Not dissimilar from the trading center of the African Forest, the Zoo upholds the eco-lodge as a modernized colonial outpost – only instead of extracting the animal products and resources of the African Forest post for empire, these eco-lodges instead extract leisure and natural spectacle for the Western upper class. Returning to the road signs, I argue they capture the logic of conservationism – while the sentiment of driving with animal welfare in mind is a respectable intent, the material realities which create these signs contradict this intent. These road signs are only needed because of the human tourist traffic into these regions, and while they may create an environmental consciousness on the individual level, their existence is predicated on existing development’s disruption of Pantanal ecosystems – often driven by tourist industries themselves (Bicalho and Hoefle 2022, 204). The (purely affective) economies of eco-tourism then, which the Houston Zoo hopes to tap into, not only renders abstract “nature” its means of production but more specifically the destruction of nature – insidiously implying that environmental destruction is required for the Zoo’s conservation model to function. 
GEOGRAPHY AND THE METROPOL(E)ITAN – DECOLONIAL FUTURES
Taking the spatial layout of the African Forest, the Pantanal and the Zoo’s other exhibits as a collective, it’s clear that the Zoo ideologizes geography itself – crafting a vision of the world which centers a Western metropole over its colonies. Addressing Figure 6 below, while in the upper diagram the Zoo appears to be an open space to roam, the reality of its walkways imposes a strict hierarchical structure upon visitor’s spatial experience. The Zoo is defined by a geometric central cavity, which hosts most of its amenities – information desks, maps, food, etc. This cavity is notably the only section of the Zoo which displays a primarily Western-dominated ecosystem, being the Texas Wetlands. In opposition to the Western-dominated cavity, curvilinear single pathways dominate the non-Western exhibits, in which continents like Asia, Africa and South America are essentialized as singular autocratic experiences. Drawing from the psychological studies of casino pathways, the curvature of non-Western regions’ pathways strategically doesn’t allow visitors to be active decision-makers (Schull 45), convincing them that they are the ones choosing to walk that route through the sites while unconsciously forcing them into a carefully ideologized programming. The non-Western continents and regions depicted are thus reduced to theatrical experiences, as sites of extraction – in which foreign lands are reduced to palatable natural spectacles, giving those in urban metropolis’ like Houston the ability to live a colonial fantasy. It is only in the perpendicular wide straightaways and stoppages of the Western central cavity in which visitors regain their agential capacity (Schull 45), deciding what to eat, where to rest and when to go – reifying the Zoo’s belief in the Western metropole’s subjecthood and non-Western regions’ objecthood.
Interrogating the Houston Zoo from its’ spatial and aesthetic choices, it becomes clear that unlike the narrative of active progress it presents, the Zoo not only fails to escape its colonial histories but actively reinvests in them in more deceptive and mystified ways. While I stand by my argumentation, it’s also vital to realize the Houston Zoo is not a standalone site but a product of broader cultural epistemes, who’s investment in colonial power matrices must be similarly challenged. It’s impossible to say whether such a process will ultimately allow the Houston Zoo to exist, but its current design make it clear that a de-colonized perspective is nonetheless a prerequisite to taking the institutions mission seriously. 
