title: BEAR date: 2025-05-01

Gentrification in the Kitchen Workplace of The Bear 

HBO’s The Bear (2022 - ) is a discomforting show. At face value, the show masters the formula of prestige television. The story centers on Carmy Berzatto, a chef who struggles in a life transition. After reaching the peak of the culinary world - running a Michelin-starred clone of Eleven Madison Park - he’s forced to return to his family’s debt-ridden sandwich shop "The Beef" in Chicago, after its former owner, his estranged brother Mikey, kills himself and leaves it to him. Surrounded by a cast of employees, each with their own traumatic backstories, Carmy and his newly-hired sous chef, the young and ambitious Sid, save their workplace by “elevating” the restaurant into the fine dining world. It’s this last fact which is so unsettling when voiced out loud - yet during one’s watch, it hardly feels so gross. 

In this essay I will begin an ethnography of the imagined world of The Bear. Prestige television, as a site of concentrated sociopolitical production (Gitlin 1979, Samuels 2023), creates an opportunity to study how hegemonic narratives perceive and construct representations of the evolving social worlds of the workplace - and subsequently, how viewers’ understanding of labor is shaped. The Bear in particular is worth examining. Because it’s the only fictionalized depiction of the restaurant as a workplace on major television/streaming services, it has a uniquely monopolistic capacity to shape how audiences understand the industry’s dynamics. I will argue that the show is an ideological Trojan Horse - through its construction of both its characters and workplaces, the show affirms gentrification as a complex but necessary process, justifying its violent displacement by convincing audiences to see labor as a means of self-actualization. 

Displacing the self  

Class conflict is the central dialectic which drives The Bear. This is created through two opposing camps. The “new guards,” led by Carmy and Sidney, want the restaurant to operate like an upscale establishment. They are countered by the “old guards”, led by Richie, who want to keep the place as a community fixture. As their conflict develops - with other coworkers navigating the divide between new and old, high-class and greasy spoon - a core question remains: does the show prescribe a “right” path forward to the gentrification-induced financial crisis, and what exactly is that direction? The show answers these questions through a reading of two episodes - “Review” from season one and “Forks” from season 2 -  centered on Richie, the show’s “face of the working man” (“Reviews”).

Richie is introduced as the archetypal blue-collar man and foil to “new guard” ideals: he counters the politics of high-dining with his authenticity, while also refuting its language with his politically incorrect one-liners and generally acting like a schmuck. I claim that, through his transformation, he becomes a viral vector through which the show carries its ideology. At "The Beef", he is displaced, both socially and financially, by the rapidly changing class landscape induced by Carmy’s reforms, consequently learning how he can and can’t deal with these changes. 

Through Richie’s conflicts with Carmy and Sidney, the show presents early on its understanding of how the gentrifying process operates - which I argue frame Richie’s desire to preserve his community as an immature and naive solution. In “Review”, the seventh episode of Season 1, the show first draws the connection between the broader community struggle against gentrification and Richie’s personal navigation of "The Beef". As Richie reminisces on a failed date with a disconnected yuppie, he laments to Sidney on the changing nature of Chicago neighborhoods like Logan Square and Wicker Park, claiming “they all suck now” to which Sid responds “they’re different.” This line of dialogue sets up the episode’s central dialectic: between seeing gentrification as a solely culturally erasing process versus seeing it as a project of potential renewal. As they argue, Richie begins projecting his frustrations:
 
“Stop fucking with this place. You let up a little bit, and everything changes… You don’t realize this is a delicate ecosystem; it’s held together by shared history, love and respect” (“Review”)

Before Sidney can respond, a bullet shatters the storefront’s glass panels. The show is clearly aware of the way that Sidney’s previous claim of difference is perceived - Richie’s frustrations and desires are relatable and honest, his desire for preserving the world he was raised in clear. Simultaneously, the scene’s writing is not subtle in its critique of these desires  - the gunshots interrupting his rant serve as a direct counterargument to Richie’s utopic imagining, punishing the viewers for empathizing with him. The abrupt bang signals that their Chicago neighborhood may not be worth preserving any longer, as the difference Sid describes includes safety and comfort that the viewer is no longer allowed to find in Richie’s laments, who is now forced into the frame of an irresponsible child. The Bear constructs a scenario in which a community preservation-centered approach is naive, emotionally-driven and reactionary - justifying the restaurant’s upscaling trajectory. 
	
 As the episode progresses, the show introduces its most dangerous argument - the true source of the white working-classes‘ anxieties are not their community's economic and social conditions, as Richie’s rant on shared history implies, but instead their own internalized struggles with identity, which their macho-conservatism prevents them from processing. Throughout the episode, as Richie encounters more and more signs of his communities changing - from the bar he hates turning into a Sweetgreen, to his “old guard” coworkers embracing Carmy and Sid’s ways - he breaks, lashing out verbally at Sid while moving aggressively towards her, after which he’s forced outside by one of his longtime friends Tina. He voices that "The Beef" isn’t “cool” anymore  - to which Tina pulls out the brakes: 

“You need to get out of here. You’re fucking my shit up… My game has improved 300% in two months. This, this place is organized, and, and, clean, and smooth and… you know how much I loved Mikey but this, this place is… good.” (“Review”)

Tina is not conservative in her commitment to the regime of ultra-capitalist efficiency that Carmy’s kitchen brings, almost jokingly quantifying the improvement of her “game.” Tina’s specific language  on how “organized,” “clean,” “smooth” and “good” the reformed Beef is doesn’t only speak to the business itself. It can be read more personally as a (1) critique of Mikey Berzatto’s failures as the previous owner, while more broadly speaking (2) on the process of neighborhood change, echoing the civilizing semiotics of settler colonialism to create order in the inner city wilderness (Zucker 2020) which the show portrays as dangerous, dysfunctional and wild. Tina’s sanitizing and efficiency-oriented language is everything the unstable and violent Richie isn’t. Despite the episode seemingly presenting itself as a more “nuanced” take on the pros and cons of gentrification, by contrasting Tina’s calmness with Richie’s clearly unnerving behavior, the audience is left with little choice on siding with who has the better approach to dictating the restaurant and consequently dictating the community.

Tina’s rant ultimately justifies her initial statement - that Richie needs to “get out of [there]” - because as he is at the moment, he does not belong in the place he feels at home. Richie’s only response to Tina is his continued insistence on protecting the "delicate fucking ecosystem," a plea he interrupts with his voice breaking and eyes watering. The slippage in his performance shifts its meaning, as we see his rants are less a defense of the restaurant’s old ways than they are a plea for the preservation of his own identity, an individual fear stemming from his unprocessed traumas as the camera cuts back-and-forth in time between his cries and a childhood scene of him hanging out with the Berzatto family, Mikey still alive. Richie’s concern isn’t really about his neighborhood, he just thinks that Tina and the restaurant’s changes shows that Mikey is really gone. The ecosystem is then not the restaurant nor the neighborhood, but Richie’s mental stability. By generating this shift, the show asks us to disinvest whatever sympathies we had with the structural claims on community erasure that Richie made before, as we instead put our bandwidth into relating to Richie’s own individual pain, the presented root cause of his suffering.

Re-placing the self

If “Review” is the show’s shifting of blame from gentrification onto the individual, then the season two episode “Forks” prescribes a solution for how people suffering identity loss like Richie should proceed - reconstructing themselves by finding purpose through labor. In the second season, "The Beef" is rebranded through an extensive loan into “The Bear” - and with it, it is revamped into the fine-dining world.  In an effort to train Richie to better fit into this new regime, Carmy sends him to stage (i.e. intern) at a Michelin-starred restaurant named “Ever”. As Richie enters the restaurant, he’s immediately transported into a futuristic dystopia:  he walks down neon-blue curving hallways, with deep basses and synths ascending a harmonic minor scale. The camerawork is found footage-like, moving on a walking gimbal with a tilt that literally tells us something’s off. In the main kitchen, we get a close-up of the restaurant's motto: “Every second counts.” The show is self-aware of the spaces that it asks those who invest in Richie’s being to put themselves in, as upon trying to find his boss, he’s told “Chef Terry is always watching” (“Forks”) - a scientifically managed Big Brother, Terry’s all-seeing eye forces employees to self-manage down to the second. The cinematography is alienating and discomforting, as we along with Richie feel out of place - reflecting the class dynamics of the upscaling “The Bear,” the root of his fears. 
 
Richie’s alienation is short-lived, as the show reframes this intensively pedantic environment as one built on pride gained from the value of the dining experience. After days of constantly cleaning streaks off of forks in a grey-scale room, Richie confronts his staging mentor, Garrett, thinking the work is below him. After asking Garrett why he “drank the Kool-Aid”, he gives an impassioned response: 
 
“I love my job. Because this restaurant opened twelve years ago and was voted best restaurant in the world the same year. It’s retained three stars since the doors opened with a waitlist that’s long, like really long … It’s outrageously expensive because we set standards that are so outrageous it takes the toll and the time from a team of 200 people to keep it in orbit because at any given moment, one of those 5000 people might be given a chance to spend a large amount of their time and money here and they will have outrageous expectations. So we’re gonna need to have forks that don’t have streaks on them … if you’re going to stay you need to have some respect for me, the rest of the staff, for the diners and for yourself.” (“Forks”)

Garrett’s message isn’t just that he loves his job, but instead he suggests that because Richie is a part of the “outrageously expensive process” and enforces the standards it entails, he gets the honor to respect and feel good about himself. After seeing how this speech uplifts Richie, who we see getting up early, singing karaoke, driving fast and jiving with his coworkers, the show asks its viewers to indulge a respect-based fantasy which compels not only Richie to drink the Kool-Aid but the audience along with him. The show tells those suffering under their alienating working conditions like Richie that by respecting their own labor via the experiences it produces, they’ll find personal worth and fulfillment, while also saving themselves from the burnout that their pedantic and abusive environments, i.e. cleaning the forks, often come with. The consequences of this are clear in the following scene. After the head chef lambasts the staff for causing a smudge on a plate, costing then 47 seconds of time, he scapegoats Garrett, shouting “Fuck you Garrett” to which he exclaims, “Yes chef - fuck me” (“Forks”). Because Garrett’s buys into the quantified value that the show argues is a generator of his self-respect, every second does count as value. Put into this contract, Garrett not only tolerates the abuse of his employer but justifies and perpetuates it upon himself - as his worth is created by the seconds constituting the experience he creates, when he wastes seconds taken away from the dining experience he has no choice but to lose respect for himself. Despite being played for laughs, Garrett’s response isn’t a critique of the head chef - Garrett is enthusiastic in his reply, the audience almost proud of his passion.

Care and respect for the dining experience are the driving forces, then, of the “Ever” workplace. Over the course of his staging, Richie is shown to take his defining human characteristic - his empathy and love for personally engaging with his community- and bring it into the project form, turning human connection into a self-contained commodity. At “Ever,” the staff are responsible for running the surveillance apparatus that Richie at first found unsettling - “watching” each other and the guests, so that they can tailor their service to create the ultimate experience. Richie is given the opportunity to do this when he overhears a customer mention how they’re leaving Chicago without trying deep dish. After reporting this to his superiors, he’s given a pre-set plan just for this scenario - running to the nearby deep dish spot, sending the pie to Ever’s head chef to be modernized as artisan bites with a mustard glaze, and then served as a surprise to the guests. This act is presented as an evolution for Richie, who the camera cuts to brimming with happiness (“Forks”), but I argue that the form of his kindness here dramatically changes it.  While at “The Beef,” Richie engages his customers using their long-term built interpersonal relationships, honed after getting sandwiches there so many times, this is impossible for the consumers of “Ever” who are there not to find community but to be wowed.  Desiring to recreate the human connection within the hyper-commodified fine-dining space, Richie instead serves his customers rather than engage them - the human relations honed with time are instead hyper optimized, replaced with an “experience” generated by the restaurant’s surveillance apparatus. Richie’s connection with his “Ever” guests is entirely manufactured - curated to maximize a momentary spectacle over long term relations, operating as a project form (Graan 2022) which exists entirely for perpetual momentary gains. While the show presents this as a liberatory moment - where Richie can still be his kind self within the fine-dining world he used to hate - the temporally limited nature of fine-dining consumers mean that he’ll crucially lose the community grounding which he originally hoped to preserve, his non-capitalist social relations commoditized into a consumer-producer contract.  By generating the system, the show is able to trick audiences into believing that both authentic human connections and the revitalizing nature of fine-dining can coexist - allowing Richie to thrive at the cost of his community. 
 
At the level of the individual, labor at “Ever” becomes a fuel through which identities lost can be reformed. On the last day of his shift, Richie asks Garrett why he’s working at all. To him, it’s a question of purpose: 

“I guess... all of my favorite memories as a kid were in restaurants. Like special occasions and seeing family and stuff. And a couple years ago I had, uh, well this is probably too personal but I had a little bit of a drug issue, and it’s fine, I’m sober now and feel healthy but... I learned a lot about acts of service and... I realized I like creating atmospheres for people, taking care of people. I had a boss once that said taking care of people at the highest level can be as valuable as medical caregiving, like in a hospital.  That’s why we use the same word - hospitality” (“Forks”)

For Garrett, the act of caring for his labor gives him value and identity. His personal loss and displacement, generated by his drug issues, transform him from a plot device to a subject that you can actively invest in like Richie. If his addiction led to his loss, then through acts of service he becomes a fully realized self - someone who values themselves and sees their worth, comparing himself to a well-respected trade. By identifying with his labor as a source of fulfillment, Garrett can become healthy and whole again - something that the show tells Richie and by proxy, the audience. It’s no coincidence that the source of Garrett’s loss of self is drug use - the fear of drugs is a core signifier of the inner-city problems that gentrifiers claim to solve through revitalization. By participating in the hyper capitalist relations of the fine-dining world, Garrett stands as a representative of the gentrification of land as he literally revitalizes his health through finding purpose in work. There is no question that this claim is, at face value, ridiculous. Even Richie jokes at the “hospitality” line - but by bringing the audience to invest in Richie and having him experience this growth, they can justify this fundamentally silly neoliberal claim. 

Going Forward 

HBO’s The Bear presents itself as a realistic view into the kitchen workplace and the communities’ struggles, a rare site of representation for the industry. This attractive premise, and consequently the susceptibility of audiences to invest in its characters, makes it the perfect medium through which to indoctrinate viewers into a neoliberal logic. By embracing the class conflict-centered media that dominates modern prestige television, The Bear is able to frame itself as an authentic look into the kitchen’s social dynamics, luring audiences that it is subsequently able to psychically reshape. Using the audiences’ investment in Richie, the show can present itself as sympathetic to the gentrified while simultaneously telling them to pull themselves up by their bootstraps and absorb themselves in their work - only this time, with kindness and passion. 











Bibliography

Todd Gitlin, Prime Time Ideology: The Hegemonic Process in Television Entertainment, Social Problems, Volume 26, Issue 3, 1 February 1979, Pages 251–266, https://doi.org/10.2307/800451

Samuels, Robert. Political pathologies from The Sopranos to succession: Prestige TV and the contradictions of the “liberal” class. Routledge, 2023.

Zucker, Meesh Meesh Lauren. Taming the city wilderness. Diss. Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2020.

Graan, A. (2022). What was the project? Thoughts on genre and the project form. Journal of Cultural Economy, 15(6), 735–752. https://doi.org/10.1080/17530350.2022.2087716

Storer, Christopher. 2023. The Bear, Season 1 “Reviews”. FX Productions. Hulu.

Storer, Christopher. 2023. The Bear, Season 2 “Forks”. FX Productions. Hulu.




